First pass to update Standard for Public Code 0.4.0 (#1263)
open-zaak/open-zaak: docs/introduction/open-source/public_code.md

- [x] criterion met.

Requirement | meets | links and notes
-----|-----|-----
A codebase MUST include the policy that the source code is based on. | yes | [API specs embeded in the codebase](https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak/blob/master/src/openzaak/components/zaken/openapi.yaml), and linked from [documentation](https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak)
A codebase MUST include all source code that the policy is based on, unless used for fraud detection. |  | "yes" or "not applicable", do we consider it based on the API?
Policy SHOULD be provided in machine readable and unambiguous formats. | yes | OpenAPI is in machine readable yaml format
Continuous integration tests SHOULD validate that the source code and the policy are executed coherently. | yes | [GitHub workflow](https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak/blob/main/.github/workflows/ci.yml), [API Test Platform](https://api-test.nl/server/1/6b5fe675-694d-4948-8896-5eae88d30ef0/14bc91f7-7d8b-4bba-a020-a6c316655e65/latest/)

## [Create reusable and portable code](https://standard.publiccode.net/criteria/reusable-and-portable-codebases.html)

> - [ ] criterion met.

Reviewer: why is this switched from met to unmet?

Author: As discussed in the call, this changes because of the new "codebase SHOULD be localizable" requirement.

Requirement | meets | links and notes
-----|-----|-----
The codebase MUST be developed to be reusable in different contexts. | yes | Designed to be so from the start.
The codebase MUST be independent from any secret, undisclosed, proprietary or non-open licensed code or services for execution and understanding. | yes | installation supports docker, kubernetes, vmware appliances, bare-metal is possible
The codebase SHOULD be in use by multiple parties. | yes |
The roadmap SHOULD be influenced by the needs of multiple parties. | yes | [Dimpact](https://www.dimpact.nl/openzaak), [market consultation](https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak-market-consultation)
Configuration SHOULD be used to make code adapt to context specific needs. |  |

> The codebase SHOULD be localizable. |  |

Reviewer: This is an ongoing effort - we do provide translations catalogs but they're not complete yet: https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak/tree/main/src/openzaak/conf/locale

Code and its documentation SHOULD NOT contain situation-specific information. | yes | Some GCloud examples but nothing required; no credentials and documentation suggests using secret generators

> Codebase modules SHOULD be documented in such a way as to enable reuse in codebases in other contexts. |  | <!-- need to investigate -->

Reviewer: API modules/classes are currently stored in the general purpose `utils` package: https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak/tree/main/src/openzaak/utils

There are plans to move this into `openzaak.api` though. Typically they are extensions on top of the django-restframework package for the API implementations.

We follow similar patterns with admin UI functionality, re-usable validators etc.

Author: As discussed in our call, the documentation around this could be more like it is in Forms.

The documentation SHOULD include instructions for how to report potentially security sensitive issues on a closed channel. | yes | [SECURITY.rst](https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak/blob/master/SECURITY.rst)

## [Maintain version control](https://standard.publiccode.net/criteria/version-control-and-history.html)

- [x] criterion met.

Requirement | meets | links and notes
-----|-----|-----
The community MUST have a way to maintain version control for the code. | yes | [GitHub](https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak)
All files in a codebase MUST be version controlled. | yes | [git](https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak/)
All decisions MUST be documented in commit messages. | yes | Commit messages are sufficiently detailed or contain links to detail; the repo has a [policy](https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#making-the-changes) and a `pull_request_template.md` which encourages referencing an issue and describing the changes @ericherman 2022-0321

> Every commit message MUST link to discussions and issues wherever possible. | yes | for non-trivial [commits](https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak/commits/master)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every commit message MUST link to discussions and issues wherever possible. | yes | for non-trivial [commits](https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak/commits/main)
```

- [ ] criterion met.

Requirement | meets | links and notes
-----|-----|-----
All of the functionality of the codebase, policy as well as source, MUST be described in language clearly understandable for those that understand the purpose of the code. | yes | additional docs are generated from code comments
The documentation of the codebase MUST contain a description of how to install and run the source code. | yes | [getting started](https://open-zaak.readthedocs.io/en/latest/development/getting_started.html), [post-install checklist](https://open-zaak.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation/index.html#post-install-checklist)
The documentation of the codebase MUST contain examples demonstrating the key functionality. |  | <!-- need to check --> improvement: add demo fixtures/instructions
The documentation of the codebase SHOULD contain a high level description that is clearly understandable for a wide audience of stakeholders, like the general public and journalists. |  | [documentation](https://open-zaak.readthedocs.io/en/latest/introduction/index.html), would like to see standard recipes and examples of more functionality

> The documentation of the codebase SHOULD contain a section describing how to install and run a standalone version of the source code, including, if necessary, a test dataset. |  | <!-- need to check docs -->

Reviewer: we have this in https://open-zaak.readthedocs.io/en/stable/installation/index.html#installation - which now points you to the target environment (real deploy, try out with docker-compose or install to actually contribute code to OZ)

> The documentation of the codebase SHOULD contain examples for all functionality. |  | <!-- need to check -->

Reviewer: The manual should cover this: https://open-zaak.readthedocs.io/en/stable/manual/index.html

> The documentation SHOULD describe the key components or modules of the codebase and their relationships, for example as a high level architectural diagram. |  | <!-- need to check -->

Reviewer: https://open-zaak.readthedocs.io/en/stable/development/principles.html should cover this

> There SHOULD be continuous integration tests for the quality of the documentation. | yes | link checks, build checks, [Travis config](https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak/blob/main/.github/workflows/ci.yml#L184-L194)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There SHOULD be continuous integration tests for the quality of the documentation. | yes | link checks, build checks, [Github Actions](https://github.com/open-zaak/open-zaak/blob/main/.github/workflows/ci.yml#L184-L194)
```

Documentation SHOULD aim for a lower secondary education reading level, as recommended by the [Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/quickref/?showtechniques=315#readable). |  | Would be good to get an evaluation of this prior to investing in translation.
Providing a translation of any code, documentation or tests is OPTIONAL. |  |

## [Use open standards](https://standard.publiccode.net/criteria/open-standards.html)

- [x] criterion met.

Requirement | meets | links and notes
-----|-----|-----
For features of a codebase that facilitate the exchange of data the codebase MUST use an open standard that meets the [Open Source Initiative Open Standard Requirements](https://opensource.org/osr). | yes | The [Zaakgericht Werken in het Gemeentelijk Gegevenslandschap](https://www.gemmaonline.nl/images/gemmaonline/f/f6/20190620_-_Zaakgericht_werken_in_het_Gemeentelijk_Gegevenslandschap_v101.pdf) meets the 5 criteria of the [Open Standards Requirement for Software](https://opensource.org/osr)
Any non-open standards used MUST be recorded clearly as such in the documentation. | n/a |

> Any standard chosen for use within the codebase MUST be listed in the documentation with a link to where it is available. | yes | <!-- link? -->

Reviewer: I think this mostly comes down to upstream VNG deciding to standardize on OpenAPI 3

Any non-open standards chosen for use within the codebase MUST NOT hinder collaboration and reuse. | n/a |
If no existing open standard is available, effort SHOULD be put into developing one. | n/a |

> Standards that are machine testable SHOULD be preferred over those that are not. |  | <!-- need to check -->

Reviewer: We have OAS tests and Integration tests for the API schema's/interaction in the CI pipeline, using Postman/newman for automation.
